[Amit Varma]: Before you listen to this episode of The Scene and the Unseen, I have a recommendation for
[Amit Varma]: you.
[Amit Varma]: Do check out Pulya Bazi, hosted by Saurabh Chandra and Pranay Kotesane, two really good
[Amit Varma]: friends of mine.
[Amit Varma]: Kick-ass podcast in Hindi.
[Amit Varma]: It's amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Imagine that you are the minister in charge of Mumbai breakfast.
[Amit Varma]: All the millions of people in Mumbai want breakfast every morning and you have to make
[Amit Varma]: sure that whatever they want to eat reaches them in time.
[Amit Varma]: Some people want eggs, some want dosa, horror of horror, some even want poha.
[Amit Varma]: But who are we to judge them?
[Amit Varma]: This means that you have to calibrate egg procurement, dosa batter procurement, poha
[Amit Varma]: procurement, tea and coffee and milk procurement and make sure that everyone gets their breakfast
[Amit Varma]: alright and the system never breaks down.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think you'd be able to do that planning?
[Amit Varma]: All the logistics, the thousands of excel sheets, the contingency plans for everything
[Amit Varma]: that could go wrong, is that a job you'd like?
[Amit Varma]: What if you failed at it and the people of Mumbai did not have breakfast for a day?
[Amit Varma]: A city of hungry people.
[Amit Varma]: Sounds like a dystopian nightmare, doesn't it?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: The question I just posed is plainly absurd.
[Amit Varma]: No one person or agency can coordinate the logistics involved in producing breakfast
[Amit Varma]: for an entire city and feeding it.
[Amit Varma]: But that doesn't mean that people haven't tried.
[Amit Varma]: The Soviet Union once attempted to manage a nation's food supplies that way and it led
[Amit Varma]: to famine, starvation and food lines.
[Amit Varma]: You cannot, as we now know, plan an economy from the top down.
[Amit Varma]: Mumbai feeds itself because millions of people pursue their own self-interest and manage
[Amit Varma]: to feed themselves by fulfilling each other's needs.
[Amit Varma]: Economy works best in a bottom-up way.
[Amit Varma]: Languages evolve, culture grows, cities form, economies run in a bottom-up way through what
[Amit Varma]: economists call spontaneous order.
[Amit Varma]: And our universe and life itself was formed in a bottom-up way.
[Amit Varma]: What we call spontaneous order can also be called natural selection.
[Amit Varma]: They're basically the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: Processes that lead to intricate and complex mechanisms.
[Amit Varma]: Designs without the need for a designer.
[Amit Varma]: Because of natural selection, we don't need a god to explain this wonderful complex universe
[Amit Varma]: we live in.
[Amit Varma]: Equally, spontaneous order explains why we do not need government, another false god,
[Amit Varma]: to run an economy or a society.
[Amit Varma]: We do need government, but not to direct things from the top.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, humans tend to instinctively think in top-down ways, to seek command and control,
[Amit Varma]: and resist bottom-up explanations.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's so absurd that many on the right hold on to the religion of God and deny
[Amit Varma]: natural selection, while many on the left hold on to the religion of government and
[Amit Varma]: deny spontaneous order.
[Amit Varma]: They are both making exactly the same creationist mistake.
[Amit Varma]: My guest for today is Matt Ridley, author of many fine books, including the one we'll
[Amit Varma]: discuss today, The Evolution of Everything.
[Amit Varma]: In this book, he writes about how the universe, life, culture, language, cities, our brains,
[Amit Varma]: our economies, and even our future, all evolve in a bottom-up way.
[Amit Varma]: And thank God for that.
[Amit Varma]: But before we move on to the conversation, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art, like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and
[Amit Varma]: table runners, and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price,
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products, including fridge magnets
[Amit Varma]: with some stunning motifs, and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo x Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip
[Amit Varma]: Sharma, Shruti Nelson, and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting, but even if you want to
[Amit Varma]: buy just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an O-U.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20.
[Amit Varma]: That's I-V-M for IVM Podcast.
[Amit Varma]: IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Matt, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: It's great to be on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Matt, it's very interesting how humans tend to think of the world in top down ways in
[Amit Varma]: all its different aspects.
[Amit Varma]: We've invented God to explain the universe, whenever we think of something that needs
[Amit Varma]: to be done, we say, hey, government should do it because someone has to centrally plan
[Amit Varma]: it and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you studied zoology in college.
[Amit Varma]: At what point did you sort of become firstly aware that, you know, the bottoms-up approach
[Amit Varma]: to the world is a better way of looking at it?
[Amit Varma]: And when did you begin to look at all of the world this way, not just, you know, not just
[Guest]: zoology and not just natural life?
[Guest]: It's a good question.
[Guest]: And I don't really remember when this dawned on me.
[Guest]: It dawned on me gradually.
[Guest]: It dawned on me in a bottom-up way, perhaps.
[Guest]: But you're right to say that this for me begins with the natural world, with biological evolution,
[Guest]: natural selection, and Charles Darwin's theory, which I learned first about in school and
[Guest]: then in more detail at university when I studied zoology, as you say.
[Guest]: And I wrote several books about evolution and genetics.
[Guest]: And it became more and more clear to me that there is an incredible complexity in the natural
[Guest]: world.
[Guest]: There is an unbelievable complexity in your body and mine as we sit here with trillions
[Guest]: of cells, millions of proteins, tens of thousands of genes, all working in coordination at exactly
[Guest]: the right levels of speed and concentration.
[Guest]: It's mind-boggling.
[Guest]: I mean, it's more complex than any machine that human beings have ever devised or even
[Guest]: could imagine devising.
[Guest]: And yet we have satisfied ourselves, those of us who understand evolution, and indeed
[Guest]: a large chunk of the world, that this can happen without direction, without creation.
[Guest]: And it just struck me relatively recently, actually, just in the last few years, that
[Guest]: we were being equally creationist about the human world as we used to be about the natural
[Guest]: world.
[Guest]: And we were thinking of the complexity of a city.
[Guest]: We're sitting in Mumbai.
[Guest]: It's an enormous city.
[Guest]: It's incredibly complicated.
[Guest]: Lots of people will have lunch in Mumbai today.
[Guest]: Who's in charge of making sure they get enough to eat?
[Guest]: The answer is nobody and everybody.
[Guest]: It's a bottom-up system.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So what I want to do in this episode is really talk about your book, The Evolution of Everything,
[Amit Varma]: which deals exactly with this.
[Amit Varma]: I'll just quote a sentence from your book so listeners get a sense of what the book
[Amit Varma]: is about.
[Amit Varma]: The way that, quote, the way that human history is taught can therefore mislead because it
[Amit Varma]: places far too much emphasis on design, direction, and planning, and far too little on evolution.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And your book, of course, is called The Evolution of Everything.
[Amit Varma]: And in a series of like 16 chapters, you take readers through essentially starting from
[Amit Varma]: the universe all the way to the internet, talking about how everything in between cultures,
[Amit Varma]: cities, languages, all of them emerge bottom up.
[Amit Varma]: And at best, they can be taught, but, you know, people who try to teach them are making
[Amit Varma]: a mistake.
[Amit Varma]: They can only be learned, as in the case of languages, for example.
[Amit Varma]: So I thought we'll just follow the structure of the book and just go kind of chapter by
[Amit Varma]: chapter because that made intuitive sense to me when I was reading it.
[Amit Varma]: That's fine.
[Amit Varma]: And your first chapter was called The Evolution of the Universe.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a very interesting concept in there called skyhooks.
[Guest]: Can you explain what that's about?
[Guest]: This is a phrase that Daniel Dennett first brought into the conversation, although it
[Guest]: was actually invented by a pilot in World War I who was told to stay up there till we
[Guest]: need you.
[Guest]: And he replied, this machine is not fitted with skyhooks.
[Guest]: I can't attach myself to the sky.
[Guest]: And obviously, you can't build a building with a skyhook, which is a pity because it
[Guest]: would be a nice way to build a building if you could hook a device to the sky and start
[Guest]: from the top.
[Guest]: But that concept, which Daniel Dennett talks about, is a metaphor for the way we talk about
[Guest]: human society all too often and the way we talk about the natural world as well when
[Guest]: we're talking.
[Guest]: So skyhook is really just a euphemism for God, if you like, in the natural world.
[Guest]: But it's often a euphemism for government in the man-made world.
[Guest]: But in this chapter on the evolution of the universe, I'm really talking about the way
[Guest]: it dawns on Isaac Newton and other people that God doesn't need to be moving the planets
[Guest]: directly.
[Guest]: They could be moving under their own force.
[Guest]: The pattern and structure of the universe could have come about completely spontaneously
[Guest]: without intervention by a higher power.
[Guest]: And that was obviously an idea that started to take root in the 17th century and gradually
[Guest]: developed and that in many ways was resisted.
[Guest]: Newton himself conceded that you don't need God to explain the movement of the planets
[Guest]: today, but something must have started it.
[Amit Varma]: So perhaps that was God.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting you talk about this notion starting in the 17th century, but you
[Amit Varma]: also write a bit about the 5th century BC Roman philosopher Lucretius, who in a sense
[Amit Varma]: anticipated both natural selection and spontaneous order, both Darwin and Adam Smith, in a manner
[Amit Varma]: of speaking.
[Guest]: Yes, Lucretius is a really interesting character.
[Guest]: We know very little about him.
[Guest]: We have this one poem that he wrote.
[Guest]: It was rediscovered in the 1400s after being lost for a century, even though people had
[Guest]: referred to it.
[Guest]: And when it was rediscovered and examined, it was found to be unbelievably modern in
[Guest]: its way of looking at the world, and it was heavily influential on philosophers like Spinoza
[Guest]: and people like Thomas Jefferson had five copies of it in his library.
[Guest]: Very important part of the Enlightenment was the influence of this one poem by Lucretius.
[Guest]: And Lucretius himself was harking back to Democritus and Epicurus, yes, thank you, that
[Guest]: was the name I was looking for.
[Guest]: And it's a poem, so we mustn't get too carried away.
[Guest]: He doesn't give details, diagrams, or references for his ideas, but he keeps saying things
[Guest]: like, look, are you sure you need a god to explain this?
[Guest]: Don't you think actually there's a way in which it could have happened spontaneously?
[Guest]: And he comes agonizingly close to describing the process of natural selection, if you interpret
[Guest]: it generously.
[Guest]: And again and again, he has this refreshing way of saying, look, actually, you can think
[Guest]: about this in a bottom-up way.
[Guest]: You can think about it coming from below.
[Guest]: And it's tempting to think that we were on the brink of a major intellectual breakthrough
[Guest]: in the first century AD.
[Guest]: Lucretius roughly lived at the same time as Cicero and Caesar and people like that.
[Guest]: And then something comes along, and we turn our back on this way of looking at the world
[Guest]: for a very long time, and we have to rediscover it in the Enlightenment in the 16th, 17th
[Amit Varma]: century.
[Amit Varma]: And Lucretius was practically branded as a heretic, and his work was lost and forgotten,
[Amit Varma]: and possibly because he challenged those top-down notions that the elite sort of had.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the same process that anyone who challenged those notions went through.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Newton faced it, Darwin faced it, Adam Smith himself faced it.
[Guest]: That's correct.
[Guest]: And this is one of the fascinating things, is that it is the ultimate heresy to go around
[Guest]: saying, actually, we don't need God.
[Guest]: We maybe don't need government.
[Guest]: And as you say, I mean, Lucretius was suppressed, actively and violently suppressed, I mean,
[Guest]: not himself, but his works were, by the Christian church when it took over the Western world.
[Guest]: And fast forward to Adam Smith, a lot of what he says gets him into real trouble and gets
[Guest]: his followers into real trouble.
[Guest]: People are prosecuted for saying the kinds of things that he's saying.
[Guest]: And my feeling about Adam Smith is that if you look at what he's saying, both in the
[Guest]: theory of moral sentiments and in The Wealth of Nations, is that he's giving a sort of
[Guest]: general theory of evolution, while Charles Darwin is giving a special theory of evolution,
[Guest]: by analogy with the special theory of relativity and Einstein, a century before Darwin.
[Guest]: So the theory of moral sentiments comes out in 1759, Charles Darwin's Origin of Species
[Guest]: comes out in 1859.
[Guest]: And so Smith is saying society evolves, society emerges, and he's talking about a morality,
[Guest]: how morality emerges, how ethics emerge in the theory of moral sentiments.
[Guest]: And he's doing so very much with the view of it coming about through the interactions
[Guest]: of ordinary people, how you calibrate what is moral and what is not through the reaction
[Guest]: of people in your society.
[Guest]: And we don't actually need priests to tell us to behave well.
[Guest]: We work it out ourselves, more or less, depending on how well society is constructed by people's
[Amit Varma]: interactions.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, your second chapter is called The Evolution of Morality.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things I learned in that chapter is that famous phrase, a metaphor of the invisible
[Amit Varma]: hand, was not used by Smith in The Wealth of Nations, but before that, in a theory of
[Amit Varma]: moral sentiments, where he was talking about how morality emerged in a bottom up way, exactly
[Amit Varma]: as you're saying, and that, you know, moral strictures are not dictated by gods on high
[Amit Varma]: or priests or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But they emerge through human interaction, as we learn how to get along with each other
[Guest]: on society in a manner of speaking.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And so it's worth remembering that people think of the invisible hand as purely an economic
[Guest]: idea, but actually, I don't think it was, I think he was.
[Guest]: It's a delightful phrase, and it's teasing and it sort of hints at this idea that morality
[Guest]: emerges.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So you gave an example of morality emerging, for example, where you contrast the disapproval
[Amit Varma]: of homosexuality with the disapproval of paedophilia.
[Amit Varma]: And how one that is a disapproval of homosexuality has sort of receded in the past decades.
[Amit Varma]: And the other has sort of, you know, more people disapprove of paedophilia, for example.
[Guest]: So if you know,
[Guest]: Very striking, I think, in my lifetime, that, I mean, paedophilia was not condoned, but
[Guest]: it was, you know, there was very little fuss about it.
[Guest]: There were a lot of schoolteachers who were probably behaving badly in the 1950s.
[Guest]: And, you know, they weren't prosecuted, they were just, well, you know, get out the way
[Guest]: or something.
[Guest]: Whereas homosexuality was illegal at the time, and people were prosecuted.
[Guest]: People like Alan Turing, you know, committed suicide under pressure from this.
[Guest]: Today, quite rightly, we are extremely tolerant in society, generally, of people being gay.
[Guest]: And we say, well, that's completely up to them.
[Guest]: That's, you know, that's none of government's business.
[Guest]: But we've become extremely intolerant of people raping or seducing children.
[Guest]: And again, rightly so.
[Guest]: But my point is that those changes didn't come about because somebody in charge said,
[Guest]: look, we're being too lenient about paedophilia and too strict about homosexuality.
[Guest]: They came about because ordinary people changed the conversation themselves.
[Guest]: Politicians followed suit in these cases, you know.
[Guest]: Politicians were catching up with the way society was changing its mind about these
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: And I think that's a very important lesson in how morality changes.
[Guest]: It tends not to be because some leader tells us what to do.
[Guest]: This word leadership that everybody uses about how we are going to come on to leadership,
[Guest]: I think.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: It is a great mistake.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And I was particularly struck by one paragraph in that chapter, and I'm just going to read
[Amit Varma]: it out again.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, a Smithian child, you mean Adam Smithian child, a Smithian child developing his sense
[Amit Varma]: of morality in a violent medieval society in Prussia, say, by trial and error, would
[Amit Varma]: end up with a moral code quite different from such a child growing up in a peaceful German
[Amit Varma]: suburb today.
[Amit Varma]: The medieval person would be judged moral if he killed people in defense of his honor
[Amit Varma]: or his city, whereas today he would be thought moral if he refused meat and gave copiously
[Amit Varma]: to charity and thought shockingly immoral if he killed somebody for any reason at all,
[Guest]: and especially for honor, stop quote.
[Guest]: Isn't that interesting?
[Guest]: I know.
[Guest]: This is the Norbert Elias theory of how culture has changed, which Steven Pinker also writes
[Guest]: about it at great length.
[Guest]: And what was virtuous in the Middle Ages, it was often to kill bad people, whereas today
[Guest]: it's virtuous not to kill people at all, except possibly in self defense.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, recently, I saw this meme on the internet about some 1920s advertisement, which
[Amit Varma]: told women how they should be the ideal wife, and you and you kind of read all of that,
[Amit Varma]: and it's completely shocking.
[Amit Varma]: And thankfully, social morals have sort of evolved away from that and changed completely.
[Amit Varma]: But would you say that morality always evolves in the right directions?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, of course, we're defining right from our vantage point.
[Guest]: But isn't that interesting?
[Guest]: Why should it evolve in the right direction rather than the wrong direction?
[Guest]: We've lived through a couple of hundred years in which morality has tended to evolve towards
[Guest]: liberalism, towards tolerance, towards being less judgmental, except in cases like pedophilia.
[Guest]: And to some extent, that must be arbitrary.
[Guest]: I mean, it must be possible for morality to evolve in the other direction.
[Guest]: And maybe you see that in some of the more theocratic societies today that Islam has
[Guest]: gone from on the whole being perfectly tolerant to somewhat less tolerant moral code in some
[Guest]: countries towards various forms of blasphemy, homosexuality being an example in that case.
[Guest]: So fundamentalism does emerge by the same process.
[Guest]: And intolerance can emerge by the same process.
[Guest]: And some of the things we're seeing today on how intolerant people are of free speech,
[Guest]: etc., could be seen in that light.
[Guest]: So I think we can take it for granted that morality will continue to evolve in a generally
[Amit Varma]: liberal direction.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Moving on to sort of your third chapter, which is the evolution of life.
[Amit Varma]: And again, one hardly sort of I think most reasonable people are now except natural selection.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing here is that you talk about how Darwin was inspired by the
[Amit Varma]: ideas of Locke and Smith, and before them, obviously, from Lucretius.
[Amit Varma]: And the great quote, which you referred to earlier in this episode is, quote, the general
[Amit Varma]: theory of evolution came before the special theory, stop quote, when Darwin sort of got
[Amit Varma]: his ideas, were they kind of heretic or were they an idea whose time had come?
[Guest]: I think if Darwin hadn't come up with a theory of natural selection, we'd still have got
[Guest]: it around the same time.
[Guest]: I mean, we know that's to be the case because of Alfred Russel Wallace, obviously, who simultaneously
[Guest]: stumbled upon the same idea.
[Guest]: Now, Wallace wasn't going to have quite such a good catalogue of anecdotes and evidence
[Guest]: to buttress it and quite such good connections as Darwin to push the ideas that might have
[Guest]: struggled more, it might have come forward in different forms.
[Guest]: And Darwin was remarkably intellectually consistent in a way that Wallace wasn't, you know, Wallace
[Guest]: refused to believe the human brain could have come about through natural selection, for
[Guest]: example.
[Guest]: So it would have been different if Darwin hadn't been there to do it.
[Guest]: But I think you're right in the sense that evolution by natural selection was ripe to
[Guest]: appear around that period.
[Guest]: We had the pieces in place.
[Guest]: And as I say, to a surprising extent, it comes from these Enlightenment thinkers from the
[Guest]: 18th century, people like Locke and Smith and so on, influencing people like Darwin.
[Guest]: The milieu that he grew up in was very much based around these ideas of Smith and people
[Guest]: like that about free markets, about freedom generally.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, you needed to plow the ground before you could sow the seeds
[Guest]: of Darwinism.
[Guest]: But it was still very heretical.
[Guest]: I mean, it was still hugely resisted, mainly from the point of view of religion, which
[Guest]: it was seen as a threat to.
[Guest]: And of course, still is, I mean, in many parts of the world, particularly parts of America,
[Guest]: natural selection is rejected out of hand, because it seems to contradict the Bible.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's very sort of interesting that before Darwin, all the thinkers who sort of
[Amit Varma]: expressed such ideas, you know, God was a thing you couldn't touch.
[Amit Varma]: So even Newton, when he would say things which would normally lead you to atheistic conclusions,
[Amit Varma]: or even Descartes, would, you know, the hedge at the very end, and sort of pay lip service
[Amit Varma]: to theistic concepts, at the end of the day.
[Guest]: Well, Amit, I'm curious as to what, to the extent to which I'm seeing everything through
[Guest]: the lens of Christianity, whereas, of course, there are many, you know, there's always been
[Guest]: many people living under different religious dispositions.
[Guest]: And I'm curious as to how easy or difficult it would be under Hinduism or under Buddhism
[Guest]: or under Islam, for these bottom up ideas to emerge.
[Guest]: And of course, they must have done.
[Guest]: And sometimes unsuccessfully and been suppressed, and sometimes come through more successfully.
[Guest]: It sort of feels like the Buddhists should have been quickest to this, because in a way,
[Guest]: the deity in Buddhism is a bit of a bottom up deity, if I could put it that way.
[Guest]: I don't know what you think about that.
[Amit Varma]: It's interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I think, Hinduism is evolving in more intolerant directions today, there's
[Amit Varma]: a tradition within Hinduism that talks about that is an atheist tradition, the Charvaka
[Amit Varma]: tradition and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Having said that, most of the Enlightenment ideas, to be quite frank, came from the West.
[Amit Varma]: You know, a friend of mine was attempting to write a book on the history of liberalism
[Amit Varma]: in India and actually trying to examine whether there are sort of liberal ideas that took
[Amit Varma]: root in India spontaneously, and it's very hard to come across them, they're all sort
[Amit Varma]: of guided by God or other sort of top down ways.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, all of these ideas of spontaneous order and natural selection have definitely
[Amit Varma]: come to us now from the West, but I think all the world is one now.
[Amit Varma]: So it's sort of kind of moot.
[Amit Varma]: Your fourth chapter was very interesting, especially because the first book I read of
[Amit Varma]: yours was Genome, all those years ago, and your fourth chapter is about the evolution
[Amit Varma]: of genes, and where you talk about how most people, even scientists tend to think of genes
[Amit Varma]: in terms of a skyhook, that genes are the master plan for the body, but you say it's
[Guest]: not so.
[Guest]: Yes, this is an interesting one, I think, because when we first decoded the human genome,
[Guest]: there's a lot of literature out there in genetics talking about wanting to find the master genes,
[Guest]: the genes that control the other genes, and so on, and this is just the wrong way of looking
[Guest]: at it.
[Guest]: This is a network, not a hierarchy.
[Guest]: Every gene is affecting every other gene, and so on, not every gene, but most genes
[Guest]: are affecting other genes in different ways.
[Guest]: And we had to get used to the idea that there were only 21,000 and not more genes, and that
[Guest]: while there are genes that switch on earlier in life, or whatever, and start a cascade
[Guest]: of events that result in other things, most genes are contributing proteins that are parts
[Guest]: of a machine, rather than chains in a series of events, and I think that is an idea that
[Guest]: hasn't quite sunk in.
[Guest]: So even geneticists confronted with this extremely bottom-up system, which is the development
[Guest]: of an incredibly complex body from 10-20,000 genes, have tended to think in terms of leadership
[Guest]: by certain genes over other genes.
[Amit Varma]: And your point is that every gene, if you use a metaphor of acting, because genes don't
[Amit Varma]: actually have volition, but every gene, in a sense, is acting in its own self interest.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't really give a damn about the master plan.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in the same way as you spoke about feeding lunch to the city of Bombay, and here
[Amit Varma]: I am in the city of Bombay, and I'm just doing my own thing, but I am, in a sense, contributing
[Amit Varma]: to this master plan of giving lunch to all of Bombay, including to myself.
[Amit Varma]: But it's not a conscious directed way, it's sort of, I just do what I do, everybody does
[Amit Varma]: what they does, and the city runs as it does.
[Guest]: Yeah, and I think that's, it's a very good analogy, a cell is like a city.
[Guest]: You know, there's lots of individuals do going about their business doing their different
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: And for the city to function, all it needs is for everybody to do their bit, not to try
[Amit Varma]: and tell everyone else what to do.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sort of struck by another quote of yours, which, again, harks back to Dawkins
[Amit Varma]: in his classic book, quote, it is a selfishness of the genes that enables individuals to be
[Amit Varma]: selfless.
[Guest]: Stop quote.
[Guest]: Well, Richard Dawkins wrote The Selfish Gene in the 1970s, very influential on me, I read
[Guest]: it when I was just starting at university, and he then was one of my teachers.
[Guest]: And I think he had a blinding insight that the generous behavior that human beings show
[Guest]: could come about because of the self interest of genes rather than because of genes for
[Guest]: generosity sort of thing.
[Guest]: And it's, you know, it's quite a hard concept to get your head around.
[Guest]: And you know, how could we be anything other than the results of replicating devices trying
[Guest]: to ensure their progression into the next generation.
[Guest]: And that is, when you think about it, a very Smithian concept.
[Guest]: Now, a lot of biologists, evolutionary biologists are convinced by this kind of selfish gene
[Guest]: argument would not find themselves at the free market end of the economic or political
[Guest]: spectrum and probably haven't understood that parallel, in my view.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a pretty stunning dissonance.
[Amit Varma]: You sort of end the chapter by saying, quote, the more we understand genomics, the more
[Amit Varma]: it confirms evolution, stop quote, moving on now to your fifth chapter, which is the
[Amit Varma]: evolution of culture.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I'm going to quote a para from the start quote, one of the great intellectual
[Amit Varma]: breakthroughs of recent decades led by two evolutionary theorists named Rob Boyd and
[Amit Varma]: Pete Richardson, is the realization that Darwin's mechanism of selective survival resulted in
[Amit Varma]: cumulative complexity applies to human culture in all its aspects to I think I read that
[Amit Varma]: somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, our habits and our institutions, from language to cities are constantly changing.
[Amit Varma]: And the mechanism of change turns out to be surprisingly Darwinian.
[Amit Varma]: It is gradual, undirected, mutational, inexorable, combinatorial, selective, and in some weak
[Amit Varma]: sense, progressive, stop quote, and an illustration you give of how culture evolves is language.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think language is a very good case to think because we can see language changing
[Guest]: before our eyes.
[Guest]: We see pronunciation changing, we see vocabulary changing, we see new words, we see words changing
[Guest]: their meanings and so on.
[Guest]: And we know, don't we, that no one is trying to do this.
[Guest]: No one is setting out deliberately to introduce a new word into the English language or something
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: It's coming about very gradually by mutation and selection, by relatively random changes,
[Guest]: some of which are accepted and some of which are rejected.
[Guest]: And one of the things that people used to say is, well, hang on, culture cannot be Darwinian
[Guest]: because a lot of the things we do are deliberate.
[Guest]: We are conscious, we're planning things, we're trying to change something.
[Guest]: That makes it very, you know, that's directed mutation.
[Guest]: The point of natural selection is that it has to be random mutation in order to discover
[Guest]: new things.
[Guest]: But actually, there's been some good mathematical modeling that shows that while even if most
[Guest]: of the things people try and do are conscious and are deliberate, as long as there's an
[Guest]: element of randomness, as long as there's an element of trial and error in there, you
[Guest]: will get a surprisingly powerful Darwinian evolution happening.
[Guest]: And Joe Henrich and his colleagues particularly have made this argument that actually, and
[Guest]: once you drill down into human culture and understand how it works, it looks much more
[Guest]: evolutionary and much less led and planned than we have tended to assume.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one of the points you make is that language is learned, not taught.
[Amit Varma]: And an example you give of this is top down language teaching versus bottom up language
[Amit Varma]: teaching and top down would be like, say, if I at the age of 44, try to learn a foreign
[Amit Varma]: language like French is for me, and, you know, I really struggled, I, you know, start learning
[Amit Varma]: it in a superficial way, and it could be really hard going.
[Amit Varma]: But every baby born in France just does it so naturally in the bottom up kind of way.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: And, you know, I think we've made a mistake in trying, I mean, I was taught Latin and
[Guest]: Greek when I was a child, I remember almost none of it now, it's faded.
[Guest]: And learning from being taught those kind of languages is surprisingly difficult, whereas
[Guest]: if I had lived in France or Germany or India, I would have, as a child, I would have very
[Guest]: quickly absorbed.
[Guest]: And, you know, I did pick up, I mean, I lived in India for a few months, one year, and I
[Guest]: didn't become proficient in Hindi, but, you know, I absorbed it without anybody teaching
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: Now, of course, it helps to have a language teacher.
[Guest]: But essentially, what a language teacher is, is just, you know, a good one, it's just immersing
[Guest]: you in the experience so you can do the learning.
[Guest]: And I think that's a good example of how we learn rather than teach.
[Amit Varma]: And I found that you also outlined a number of rules on how sort of language tends to
[Amit Varma]: evolve.
[Amit Varma]: For example, frequently used words tend to be short, common words change slowly.
[Amit Varma]: For example, the meaning of the you said is never really going to change because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you'd have to make too many people learn a new meaning.
[Amit Varma]: But something like prevaricate has, in fact, changed.
[Guest]: Yes, exactly.
[Guest]: So the word prevaricate is now routinely used, certainly in the UK, I don't know about elsewhere
[Guest]: in the world, to mean delay.
[Guest]: It doesn't mean that.
[Guest]: It means to lie, actually.
[Guest]: People when they say prevaricate, they're thinking of procrastinate.
[Guest]: But they actually, for some reason, they use the word prevaricate instead.
[Guest]: That's changed in my lifetime, there's no point getting cross about it and saying we've
[Guest]: lost a perfectly good word, procrastinate, and we've, you know, we've lost the meaning
[Guest]: of the word prevaricate.
[Guest]: These things happen.
[Guest]: But it's not going to happen to a small word like me or and or the, you know, those don't
[Guest]: change.
[Guest]: Those regularities, those rules look like they were, you know, set down by some Supreme
[Guest]: Court of the English language, which, of course, is not the case.
[Amit Varma]: It's that it's a natural pragmatism of all of us.
[Amit Varma]: It's natural pragmatism is a very good way of putting it.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, before we started recording this podcast, I told you, I'll record the intro
[Amit Varma]: and the outro later.
[Amit Varma]: And then it strikes me that outro also in a manner of speaking is a word that is evolving.
[Amit Varma]: Because there's really no such word as outro.
[Amit Varma]: But well, I would argue now there is because people use it that it's everyone understands
[Amit Varma]: what one means by it.
[Guest]: Well, who invented it?
[Guest]: When?
[Amit Varma]: Who started the word outro?
[Amit Varma]: Who knows, if you're listening to this podcast, eight centuries later, I'm going to take credit
[Amit Varma]: for it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, there's no central planning directory, which marks the date on which it was invented
[Amit Varma]: by a committee, we're now going to take another word that, you know, didn't mean what it now
[Amit Varma]: means a while ago, a break, a short commercial break, so we'll be back after that.
[Unknown]: Hey, it's been another great week on IBM podcast.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please make sure you do we're IBM podcast
[Unknown]: on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: This week, we have a new history podcast echoes of India with Anirudh Kanisetti.
[Unknown]: The inaugural episode narrates the story of Gandhara, the melting pot of the ancient world
[Unknown]: where Indo Greeks worshipped Greco Indian gods.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus says Cyrus is joined by Varun Duggirala, co founder and content chief at The Glitch.
[Unknown]: Varun recollects his early days as an intern on MTV Pakra, his many oddball jobs and his
[Unknown]: new podcast advertising is dead.
[Unknown]: Yes, that's right.
[Unknown]: He has a new podcast launching on the 27th.
[Unknown]: Each week, Varun will discuss the changes and developments in the business of advertising,
[Unknown]: branding, content, media and a whole range of issues that exist within the industry.
[Unknown]: Episodes are out every Tuesday.
[Unknown]: On the scene in the Unseen, Amit Verma is joined by author and journalist Matt Ridley
[Unknown]: to discuss the evolution of the universe, life, culture, our minds and our futures.
[Unknown]: On the Geekfruit podcast, Tejas and Dink are slowly lose their mind while they're trying
[Unknown]: to process just how much they were disappointed by the Fantastic Beasts sequel.
[Unknown]: Next week on IVM Likes, Abbas and Surbhi talk about Homecoming the podcast versus Homecoming
[Unknown]: the show.
[Unknown]: Also, we're reaching 100 episodes of IVM Likes soon.
[Unknown]: Share your favorite moments from the show with us and your most memorable recommendations.
[Unknown]: You can write to us at shows at IndusFox.com.
[Unknown]: Also send us a voice note if you can and we'll play it on the 100th episode.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's continue on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with the author Matt Ridley about the evolution of everything.
[Amit Varma]: To go back to your fifth chapter about the evolution of culture, there was one sentence
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to ask you to explain to me, which I didn't really quite understand, but it's
[Amit Varma]: very intriguing, which is you write that in people, genes are probably the slaves, not
[Amit Varma]: the masters of culture.
[Guest]: Ah, yes.
[Guest]: Well, what I think I'm trying to argue here is that gene culture coevolution is the idea
[Guest]: that if culture changes, that could put pressure on the genes to change.
[Guest]: So for example, we have tended to argue that in order to become modern linguistic people,
[Guest]: something had to change in our brain.
[Guest]: And after that, we began speaking because at last we had the circuitry to use language
[Guest]: in our heads.
[Guest]: I've argued, and I've published peer-reviewed papers arguing this actually, that it could
[Guest]: be the other way around.
[Guest]: So for example, if we started using our voices a lot to communicate, that would put selective
[Guest]: pressure on whoever could articulate particularly well to have more children because they're
[Guest]: better at communicating.
[Guest]: So it's the culture that starts the change and the genes that follow.
[Guest]: The culture is the horse and genes are the cart.
[Amit Varma]: And it's like the virtuous cycle in that case.
[Guest]: Yes, that's true, exactly.
[Guest]: It's a virtuous circle.
[Guest]: But we have very nice examples of this.
[Guest]: For example, in tolerance of milk, the ability to digest milk, which is something that Western
[Guest]: Europeans have and some Africans have, but is relatively rare elsewhere in the world.
[Guest]: I think it's relatively common in India, but I'm not sure.
[Guest]: But in the Far East, it's really quite scarce.
[Guest]: Now why is that?
[Guest]: We're talking about adults, I mean obviously children can digest milk.
[Guest]: Lactose is the key thing.
[Guest]: Lactose is a sugar-founded milk that adult human generally can't digest unless they come
[Guest]: from certain cultures.
[Guest]: Now what happened?
[Guest]: Did people say, oh good, I'm lactose tolerant, therefore I'm going to invent dairy farming?
[Guest]: Or did they invent dairy farming and get some benefit out of eating milk because after it's
[Guest]: got proteins and other things in it and you could turn it into cheese and eat that, which
[Guest]: is fine.
[Guest]: But they all had a bit of indigestion from the lactose.
[Guest]: And then people who genetically found that their infant genes for lactose digestion remained
[Guest]: switched on throughout life were suddenly at an advantage.
[Guest]: They got more energy out of the milk than other people.
[Guest]: And so the genes started changing.
[Guest]: So we know in that case, I mean that's far more plausible as to what happened, is that
[Guest]: the culture changed towards keeping animals for their milk and that was followed by a
[Guest]: genetic change.
[Amit Varma]: But with that sort of natural selection not happening now, it's kind of moot, right?
[Amit Varma]: You can look at the past and talk about culture influencing genes, but that's no longer happening
[Guest]: obviously, right?
[Guest]: Well, I'm not so sure.
[Guest]: I think there are things that are happening today that are bound to be changing, putting
[Guest]: genetic influences on us.
[Guest]: It's hard to think of an example.
[Guest]: One of the problems with modern culture is it changes so fast and often not consistently
[Guest]: in the same direction for a long time.
[Guest]: But suppose there's a lot of people who have relatively small numbers of children today.
[Guest]: Now if there's some cultural habit that's leading people to be less likely to have babies
[Guest]: and other cultural habit that's leading people to have lots of babies, then these will change.
[Amit Varma]: Then we're in trouble because I always argued that smarter people have less babies.
[Guest]: Well, there is that.
[Guest]: And actually, if you look at all religions around the world, whether you look at Protestant
[Guest]: Christianity, Catholic Christianity, different forms of Islam, Judaism, Hinduism, on the
[Guest]: whole, the more orthodox and fundamentalist people are, the more children they're having.
[Guest]: There's a very good book called The Religious Shall Inherit the Earth, I think it's called.
[Guest]: And the argument here is that now that we're limiting family size voluntarily, and it used
[Guest]: to be that everybody tried to have as many children as possible, but now that most people
[Guest]: are settling for one or two children, the exceptions are going to be dominating posterity
[Guest]: to a surprising extent.
[Guest]: Now those exceptions tend to be fundamentalist.
[Guest]: So if there is a gene for fundamentalism, like, exactly, it's on, it's on the rise.
[Amit Varma]: You end that chapter on culture by writing about cities.
[Amit Varma]: And you point out, you know, in India, these days, our Prime Minister Narendra Modi keeps
[Amit Varma]: talking about smart cities, he wants to design new cities, and, you know, a huge amount of
[Amit Varma]: top down thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And what you actually point out is that most big cities emerge spontaneously, they weren't
[Amit Varma]: planned by some government or higher power or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And an example you give of this is England in the first half of the 19th century.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: No, I mean, the growth of industrial cities like Manchester or Birmingham in the UK is
[Guest]: an entirely spontaneous phenomenon, there's there's no, you know, government didn't set
[Guest]: out to say, right, we're going to build some bigger cities.
[Guest]: It's true that when people realized how cities were growing, they then said, hang on, let's
[Guest]: plan the infrastructure so that it's more user friendly.
[Guest]: So for example, the grid system that you get in the middle of many American cities, and
[Guest]: indeed, curiously, in Glasgow, for example, is an example of top down and, and we're often
[Guest]: very grateful for it.
[Guest]: I mean, you couldn't get around Manhattan so easily if it was a higgledy piggledy city
[Guest]: like, well, you could, I mean, we get around London, okay, we get around Bombay, okay.
[Guest]: Obviously, you know, you can't have zero government in a city, you can't have no police, you can't
[Guest]: have no ability to build the roads, you can't have no traffic lights, you know, that's not
[Guest]: what we're saying.
[Guest]: What we're saying is that you do have to take into account that these things will change
[Guest]: spontaneously and you may be wrong if you plan for them to change in one way, and they
[Guest]: actually want to change in a different way.
[Guest]: It's a bit like the way if you set up a park, and you put the paths across the park wrong,
[Guest]: and people say, no, actually, I want to work from that corner to that corner, not this
[Guest]: corner to this corner, then people will make what they call desire lines, which is tracks
[Guest]: across the grass.
[Guest]: And you're much better moving your concrete to where the tracks are than trying to put
[Guest]: up big signs saying keep off the grass, stick to these tracks.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, it's much better, therefore, letting a city or an urban settlement evolve
[Amit Varma]: as it will, and then building the infrastructure to service it and, you know, getting all of
[Amit Varma]: that done rather than trying to second guess what people may want and putting that in place.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: And I mean, although, as I say, you can go too far, you do have to anticipate demand
[Guest]: to some extent, for example, for water or something like that.
[Guest]: But it's important to be flexible and say, look, hang on, the way people want to live
[Guest]: in cities these days is actually changing, and we shouldn't disapprove of it, we should
[Guest]: just change the way we're operating so as to make room for it.
[Amit Varma]: And a magnificent book I'd recommend to my listeners, and I know you must also be a fan
[Amit Varma]: of it is Death and Life of Great American Cities by Jane Jacobs.
[Guest]: Oh, yes.
[Guest]: I mean, Jane Jacobs is the genius behind these ideas for cities, because she was the one
[Guest]: who, who campaigned against the sort of central planning of infrastructure in New York that
[Guest]: was ruining neighborhoods.
[Amit Varma]: Epitomized by Robert Moses.
[Amit Varma]: Robert Moses.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on now to chapter six, the evolution of the economy, which begins by your invoking
[Amit Varma]: Frederick Bastia, who is also the inspiration behind the name of this podcast, the seen
[Amit Varma]: in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: And Bastia wrote about just as you were talking about, you know, giving lunch to the people
[Amit Varma]: of Mumbai.
[Amit Varma]: Bastia wrote about feeding Paris, where he said that who feeds Paris, that if you have
[Amit Varma]: a central planner who tries to feed Paris, the task will simply be too overwhelming.
[Amit Varma]: But hey, Paris manages quite fine on its own.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I think this is a great insight.
[Guest]: It's a great way of looking at the world and Bastia really nails it here.
[Guest]: Because with food, people immediately get what you're talking about, I find, that if
[Guest]: you say, look, there's a better way of feeding Bombay, and that is to put one food commissioner
[Guest]: in charge of it, and he can plan well in ahead and make sure that the right amount of food
[Guest]: is available to the right kind of people.
[Guest]: Well, we know that doesn't work.
[Guest]: It's called central planning.
[Guest]: It was tried in the Soviet Union and other places, and it's a disaster wherever it's
[Guest]: tried.
[Guest]: But we know that the way to achieve the feeding of a city is supply and demand, that if there's
[Guest]: not enough demand for fish and there's too much supply, there's not enough supply of
[Guest]: bread, and there's too much demand for bread, then the price of fish and bread will reflect
[Guest]: that, and that will automatically adjust without anyone anticipating it, without anyone ordering
[Amit Varma]: it, without anyone leading it.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a nice dystopian novel to be written there, the food commissioner.
[Guest]: There is, that's a good point.
[Guest]: Let's do it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And one interesting point you made, which, you know, and so for a moment, I'll ask you
[Amit Varma]: to kind of digress, you say here, today, few people appreciate just how similar the arguments
[Amit Varma]: made by Smith and Darwin are.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, essentially, to me, the way I see it, it's an identical argument.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, natural selection is spontaneous order, which is a term people use for the way the
[Amit Varma]: economy sort of forms itself, that you don't need a central planner, that all of these
[Amit Varma]: things happen by themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a beautiful, almost mystical process, in a sense, like Douglas Adams once said that
[Amit Varma]: he didn't need God because the wonder of natural selection was enough to fill him with that
[Amit Varma]: kind of amazing awe.
[Amit Varma]: But yet we find that when it comes to politics, you have, you know, people on one side who
[Amit Varma]: are creationists of one sort, and people on the other side, people on the left are actually
[Amit Varma]: creationists when it comes to the economy.
[Amit Varma]: Why do you think that is?
[Guest]: This is a fascinating phenomenon, isn't it?
[Guest]: So I've, in my career, mixed with free market economists and evolutionary biologists.
[Guest]: And I've often said to them, you guys are saying the same thing.
[Guest]: Do you realize it?
[Guest]: And the evolutionary biologists will all vote for, nearly all, not all, but will mostly
[Guest]: vote for a sort of socialist view of the economy, and the free market economists will quite
[Guest]: often be found saying, well, no, I, you know, I don't really think Darwinism's right.
[Guest]: You know, because they're on the, free market economists tend to be associated with the
[Guest]: right wing, certainly in the United States, whereas evolutionary biologists tend to be
[Guest]: on the left wing because they're academics and scientists, and most are.
[Amit Varma]: And I long to bash heads together and say, hang on, yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: And you know, forget right and left.
[Guest]: This idea of spontaneous order is more important than that.
[Guest]: And it's neither one thing nor the other.
[Guest]: I mean, it's certainly, you know, if by right wing, you mean authoritarian, it's certainly
[Guest]: not that.
[Guest]: It's the very opposite of that.
[Guest]: And you know, what could be more liberating than the idea that ordinary people are in
[Guest]: charge of their own destiny through a slightly messy, but rather beautiful system of spontaneous
[Amit Varma]: order?
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, that's something where you talk about the economy as well.
[Amit Varma]: Again, I'll quote from you, quote, free market commerce is the only system of human organization
[Amit Varma]: yet devised where ordinary people are in charge, unlike feudalism, communism, fascism, slavery,
[Amit Varma]: and socialism, stop quote, where you kind of point out that the decisions about what
[Amit Varma]: companies should exist, who should make a profit, who is doing a good job of serving
[Amit Varma]: others or whatever, are made by ordinary people, not some central power in that.
[Guest]: Yeah, look at the way big companies are vulnerable to their consumers.
[Guest]: You know, if Kohler launches a product and it's not good, then the whole Kohler company
[Guest]: is in trouble.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, look at the way big companies have to rush to, you know, if they offend
[Guest]: their consumers, their customers in some way, they're in real trouble quite quickly.
[Guest]: So in a proper commercial system, as long as these big companies don't have the ear
[Guest]: of government and can get defense that way, they are very vulnerable and the people in
[Guest]: charge are the ordinary people, the customers, which is by the way, one of the reasons I
[Guest]: never use the word capitalism for this system if I can, because capitalism is a much more
[Guest]: top-down view.
[Guest]: I think it's an idea of big capitalists being in charge and I think that's the mistake.
[Guest]: I think we need to think of it as consumers being in charge of the pull from consumers
[Guest]: rather than the push from producers.
[Guest]: That said, through crony capitalism, through the links between business and government,
[Guest]: it is sometimes possible, of course, for big business to behave in a very heavy-handed
[Guest]: and top-down way and insist that rival small competitors don't get a chance and so on.
[Guest]: So I think that's, you know, one has to watch out for that.
[Guest]: But that isn't free commerce.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I've heard historians who defend Nehru's sort of Fabian socialist vision say that,
[Amit Varma]: listen, in the late 40s, he set up, he got a group of industrialists together to form
[Amit Varma]: what was called the Bombay Plan, to talk about their vision for an independent India, whenever
[Amit Varma]: India became independent, what the economy should look like.
[Amit Varma]: And they say that, look, they endorse Nehru's view of a top-down, socialistic planned economy
[Amit Varma]: model.
[Amit Varma]: And my reply to that is, of course, they would, they're protecting their markets.
[Amit Varma]: In an actual free market, no one is protected.
[Amit Varma]: The government simply doesn't have the power to protect this player or that player and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and a classic example of how this kind of creative destruction happen is in
[Amit Varma]: the fact that, say, a company like Kodak, which was such a behemoth a while ago doesn't
[Amit Varma]: exist anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, 12 years ago, if you had to buy mobile phones, you know, Nokia was a big
[Amit Varma]: player and people who wanted to send emails on their phone would use Blackberry and look
[Amit Varma]: what happened, you know, things change so fast, because the consumer is always kind
[Amit Varma]: of in charge.
[Amit Varma]: And yet there is this sort of tendency to look at government as a solution for everything
[Amit Varma]: and I'm going to quote another sort of paragraph which also spoke to me where you say, quote,
[Amit Varma]: take six basic needs of a human being, food, clothing, health, education, shelter and transport.
[Amit Varma]: Roughly speaking, in most countries, the market provides food and clothing, the state provides
[Amit Varma]: health care and education, while shelter and transport are provided by a mixture of the
[Amit Varma]: two.
[Amit Varma]: Now, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And what is kind of obvious to anyone listening to this is that look in terms of what the
[Amit Varma]: market provides in terms of food and clothing, we have like far greater variety than we ever
[Amit Varma]: did before we get far greater value for money, anyone can kind of afford those.
[Amit Varma]: But when it comes to health care and education, which the government provides, it is such
[Amit Varma]: a mess.
[Guest]: Yes, I think this is a very striking point, actually, that, you know, it's not immediately
[Guest]: obvious why we haven't got a National Food Service in the UK and allowed health care
[Amit Varma]: to be provided by the market.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there are reasons, but it's, you know, health, you never know quite when you're gonna
[Amit Varma]: need health care, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But as you point out, there was a sort of a National Food Service, we've seen that counterfactual
[Guest]: in the Soviet Union.
[Guest]: Indeed, and in the UK, we had food rationing, right through in the 1950s, Germany gave up
[Guest]: food rationing much sooner than Britain, because they saw that if they stopped food rationing,
[Guest]: supplies would rise to meet demand.
[Guest]: And Britain kept thinking, no, no, food's still scarce.
[Guest]: So we're still gonna, well, the reason it was scarce, because you had rationing, you
[Guest]: know, I mean, it's a circular argument.
[Guest]: Just look at the way food and clothing are cheap, varied, responsive to demand, and evolving
[Guest]: all the time.
[Guest]: Just look at the way health and education tend to get stuck in these ways of dealing
[Guest]: things and tend to be starved of resources, and everybody's complaining that there's an
[Guest]: off budget, and so on.
[Guest]: It's no coincidence that on the whole, they are provided by the government, whereas food
[Guest]: and clothing are provided by the market.
[Guest]: We need to try and find more market mechanisms to deliver health and education.
[Guest]: Now, that doesn't mean we dissolve all government intervention overnight, and some countries
[Guest]: have found quite good ways of government making sure that poor people don't suffer for lack
[Guest]: of health care or education.
[Guest]: The obvious thing is a voucher system.
[Guest]: You know, you essentially say, look, here's a voucher for educational health, go out and
[Guest]: buy it from whichever provider can provide it for you best, that would provoke a ferment
[Guest]: of innovation in trying to deliver effective health care and food and education to people.
[Amit Varma]: For those of my listeners who don't know what a voucher system is, I've had an episode on
[Amit Varma]: this in the past, I've had different episodes on education, a voucher system basically means
[Amit Varma]: that the government continues to spend what it is spending on education, but it empowers
[Amit Varma]: the parents.
[Amit Varma]: So instead of funding the schools, it gives vouchers to the parents and wherever the parents
[Amit Varma]: choose to send their kid, that school can encash the voucher, whether it is a government
[Amit Varma]: school or a private school.
[Amit Varma]: And parents are really in the best place to make decisions about their children's education
[Amit Varma]: rather than the state.
[Amit Varma]: I've got a couple of episodes of this in the past, which will be linked from the page of
[Amit Varma]: this podcast.
[Amit Varma]: So you can kind of have a look at that the analog I tend to give to people about you
[Amit Varma]: know, the difference between private provision and government provision is that back in the
[Amit Varma]: 1980s, when I was growing up in India, telecom and airlines were government monopolies, you
[Amit Varma]: had one government telephone company, and it would take up to five years to get a telephone
[Amit Varma]: connection.
[Amit Varma]: So if you want to, you know, if you want to telephone today, you get on the waiting list,
[Amit Varma]: it takes maybe five years.
[Amit Varma]: And a ditto the one government airline was so expensive, most people couldn't afford
[Amit Varma]: to travel.
[Amit Varma]: But those got privatized in the liberalization of the early 90s.
[Amit Varma]: And today, anybody can, you know, buy a phone, which is like ludicrously cheap compared to
[Amit Varma]: what it was, and you'll get a phone in five minutes today.
[Amit Varma]: And equally airlines also are extremely cheap.
[Amit Varma]: But what the government did not allow the private sector to do enough in was, for example,
[Amit Varma]: education and healthcare.
[Amit Varma]: And the argument with education always is that listen, it's too important to be left
[Amit Varma]: to the market.
[Guest]: And I would actually argue that dammit, it's too important to be left to the state.
[Guest]: I think you're exactly right, and you know, we're constantly talking about market failure.
[Guest]: Well, we need to talk about government failure.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, the government is chronically bad at delivering certain things.
[Amit Varma]: And government failure is literally ubiquitous and market failure only tends to happen when
[Amit Varma]: the government doesn't allow the market to operate.
[Amit Varma]: On the whole, I think that's true.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Let's let's kind of move on to your next chapter, chapter seven, which is the evolution of technology.
[Amit Varma]: And again, you wrote a piece in the Wall Street Journal, if I remember correctly, which kind
[Amit Varma]: of summarise the arguments made in this and this I found really interesting where you
[Amit Varma]: talk about how technological innovations seem to come about almost as a matter of course.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not like there was one great inventor who invented something and without him, we
[Amit Varma]: would not have that invention.
[Amit Varma]: But it's just like when there is a time for it, they kind of happen, you give an example
[Amit Varma]: of the light bulb and everyone says that, you know, Edison was the inventor.
[Amit Varma]: But the point you make is if Edison didn't invent it, it was inevitable someone would
[Amit Varma]: have because there were 26 simultaneous.
[Guest]: I think it's either 21 or 23, depending on who you count.
[Guest]: People who can lay claim, according to Robert Friedel, who's researched this, to have invented
[Guest]: the light bulb independently of Edison.
[Guest]: And there is no question that if Edison had been run over by a tram, we'd still have had
[Guest]: light bulbs.
[Guest]: Because the ability to create a vacuum with a vacuum pump, the ability to blow glass,
[Guest]: the ability to make light with filaments had all been developed.
[Guest]: And these technologies were bound to come together.
[Guest]: And you've got lots of people doing it.
[Guest]: And actually, you find this phenomenon with pretty well every technology that there is
[Guest]: a phase of simultaneous invention when lots of people arrive at the same idea at the same
[Guest]: time, because the idea is ripe.
[Amit Varma]: It's evolved.
[Guest]: In the late 1930s, computing is sort of inevitable.
[Guest]: You know, you've got lots of different people trying to do it.
[Guest]: Some more electronic than others, some more mechanical.
[Guest]: But you know, they're basically the ideas that come together to make computing are ready
[Guest]: to marry and mate and produce a new idea.
[Guest]: And so this makes the changing technology of the world a much more inexorable process
[Guest]: than we tend to think of it.
[Guest]: We tend to think, my goodness, if Einstein or Edison hadn't come along, the world would
[Guest]: have remained stuck in a different state.
[Guest]: And that's simply not the case.
[Guest]: There's a paradox here, though, which is that if that's the case, then why didn't we invent
[Guest]: everything hundreds of years before?
[Guest]: And also, why does it happen in certain parts of the world?
[Guest]: Why does Silicon Valley have to invent the software or whatever?
[Guest]: Why does Victorian Britain have to develop the steam engine?
[Guest]: Why does it happen when and where it does?
[Guest]: And I'm still wrestling with those.
[Guest]: And actually, that's going to be a big part of my next book is writing a book on innovation
[Guest]: to try and understand this process.
[Guest]: But the idea, it has to be seen as evolutionary.
[Guest]: It's the combination of ideas, the recombination of ideas, and they turn into new ideas as
[Guest]: a result.
[Guest]: And Kevin Kelly has a wonderful book, which he writes about, which is called What Technology
[Guest]: Wants.
[Guest]: And he's trying to turn it upside down and say, look, it's technology that's doing the
[Guest]: evolving and it's choosing the inventors to do it.
[Guest]: And actually, that's a surprisingly fruitful way of looking at it.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there's a great sentence in your chapter, which says the same thing, quote,
[Amit Varma]: we ride rather than drive the innovation wave, technology will find its inventors rather
[Amit Varma]: than vice versa, stop quote, and you also use this to sort of make the point that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, we should kind of rethink patents, therefore, because patents tend to favor the lucky guy
[Amit Varma]: who just happened to file the papers first.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, technology, in a sense, is inevitable, it's evolving, it's going to happen anyway.
[Guest]: Well, I do think that intellectual property is overrated.
[Guest]: The more you study it, the more you see that it's actually being used for exactly the opposite
[Guest]: purpose for which it's intended.
[Guest]: It's intended to incentivize innovation.
[Guest]: It has tended to morph into a system whereby people keep competitors out and hang on to
[Guest]: monopolies longer than they deserve to.
[Guest]: You've obviously got to have a balance here, because you can't simply throw open to all
[Guest]: competitors something that you've, through regulation, insisted be tested very carefully
[Guest]: before it's released on the market, like a drug or something like that.
[Guest]: And it's the same with copyright.
[Guest]: I think the metaphor that we use for intellectual property for copyright or patents is wrong.
[Guest]: It's not a property, because the thing about physical property, a building or a house or
[Guest]: a field or something, is that I can own it and prevent anyone else having access to it.
[Guest]: But if I were to share it, then I lose something.
[Guest]: Then somebody else is using my house and we can't both live in the house at the same time.
[Guest]: Whereas with an idea, you can give it away and still have it, although you're less likely
[Guest]: to be able to make money out of its monopoly.
[Guest]: So actually, the way Paul Romer talks about this kind of thing with his endogenous growth
[Guest]: theory is that by being the first mover, by getting there first, you get a brief monopoly
[Guest]: anyway.
[Guest]: You've got to figure out how to put this together, and that's enough to keep you going.
[Guest]: And if you look at most of the software industry, it hasn't been made possible by patents.
[Guest]: It's been made possible by people getting there, being smart, doing it first, and doing
[Guest]: it well.
[Guest]: You know, Apple and Amazon and people like that don't rely on patents to keep their competitive
[Guest]: edge.
[Guest]: They rely on innovation.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the way we should be thinking about the world.
[Amit Varma]: Chapter eight is called Evolution of the Mind.
[Amit Varma]: And I found it really interesting and counterintuitive because people think that if there is one
[Amit Varma]: thing that is top-down, it is surely the self, that I am in charge and my body and my brain
[Amit Varma]: are under my control.
[Amit Varma]: And I've recently sort of come to rethink free will, and I pretty much don't see how
[Amit Varma]: free will can be there.
[Amit Varma]: I kind of follow in the path of Sam Harris and Robert Sapolsky in this.
[Amit Varma]: And your chapter does a fascinating overview of that whole debate and shows that how a
[Amit Varma]: lot of what we think we are doing, we aren't actually doing it.
[Amit Varma]: We are sort of, the causation is sort of the other way around.
[Guest]: Yes, this is a very different chapter to the rest of the book, and I delve into philosophy
[Guest]: and as always with the free will argument, and I've wrestled with it in previous books
[Guest]: before, I'm never entirely satisfied that I've reached the right answer.
[Guest]: But I do think that we have to move away from thinking of a homunculus in the middle of
[Guest]: our brain in charge, sitting at a little control.
[Guest]: In the movie Men in Black, they open up a corpse and they find this little person sitting
[Guest]: in there with a control panel, and of course, that's not what's going on.
[Guest]: And when it comes to things like responsibility for your behavior, for example, somebody who
[Guest]: commits crimes and it turns out to be a tumor in their head that's causing it, that sort
[Guest]: of, we're clearly then saying, okay, so it wasn't you that was responsible, it was the
[Guest]: tumor.
[Guest]: Well, what is you?
[Guest]: You know, I mean, who would you be?
[Guest]: And actually, we need to turn this over and start thinking it the other way up, you know,
[Guest]: that after all, we know that the mind is simply the product of the brain, there's nothing
[Guest]: else in there, you know, there's no, we're never going to find some sort of secret source
[Guest]: called the soul.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's always been fascinating to me how personality and identity are so contingent.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you tweak the chemical balance of your brain a little bit, or you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if there's a tumor somewhere, you suddenly become an entirely different person.
[Amit Varma]: And I think this should introduce humility in a lot of people about who they really are.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: So at three in the morning, I'm a pessimist.
[Guest]: At noon in the daytime, I'm an optimist.
[Guest]: I don't, you know, it's nothing to do with the world, it's to do with the brain chemistry
[Guest]: of my head.
[Amit Varma]: You're a rational optimist.
[Guest]: I am indeed a rational optimist.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: I know we are running kind of short of time, I need to wind this up.
[Amit Varma]: So let's kind of go through the different chapters.
[Amit Varma]: Your ninth chapter is the evolution of personality, where you refer to that classic book by Judith
[Amit Varma]: Rich Harris, A Nurture Assumption, you know, one of my favorite books and one of the most
[Guest]: important social science books of the 20th century.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: She kind of, I mean, her conclusions essentially are that, to quote you, differences in personality
[Amit Varma]: are formed roughly half by the direct and indirect effects of genes, and roughly half
[Amit Varma]: by something else, which did not include the home environment at all.
[Guest]: Unquote.
[Guest]: Isn't this amazing?
[Guest]: And Robert Plomin has now written a book called blueprint, which makes exactly the same argument
[Guest]: with it with even better data.
[Guest]: And this is a remarkable discovery and an unexpected one, I have to say, I'm surprised
[Guest]: by it, that our parents are not a great influence on our personalities.
[Guest]: Our personalities are the product of our genes to a large extent, and also to sort of experiences
[Guest]: which can often be quite ephemeral or quite accidental things that happen in our lives.
[Guest]: Plomin gives the example of Charles Darwin, who was selected for the Beagle voyage by
[Guest]: the captain who liked the shape of his nose, and he believed in phrenology that your nose
[Guest]: told you something about your personality, and he thought this would be a good person
[Guest]: to share a cabin with for five years because of the shape of his nose.
[Guest]: Now, because of going on the Beagle, Charles Darwin, obviously his personality must be
[Guest]: influenced by that as is, of course, his future life course, et cetera, an incredibly accidental
[Guest]: thing that should shape his life.
[Guest]: Some people feel threatened by this, what do you mean I'm just a product of my genes?
[Guest]: I would like to be the product of my family.
[Guest]: Well, actually, being the product of your genes means you're you, you're not what someone
[Guest]: else has made you.
[Guest]: And that actually is a very liberating thought, I think.
[Amit Varma]: Although it's an accident.
[Amit Varma]: It's an accident.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one of the really interesting revelations in this chapter, interesting factoid,
[Amit Varma]: if I may call it that, and that's another term that's evolved factoid, was that people's
[Amit Varma]: incomes, men's incomes are actually determined by how tall they are, taller men tend to earn
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: But this is a height at the age of 16.
[Amit Varma]: Not their height at the age of 30.
[Guest]: Isn't that fascinating?
[Guest]: I know.
[Guest]: Mind blowing.
[Guest]: I'm very tall, but I wasn't particularly tall at 16.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd be richer if I was doing fine.
[Amit Varma]: Your next chapter is again, extremely fascinating to me, which is the evolution of education.
[Amit Varma]: Education is something that's always kind of been top down.
[Amit Varma]: And we this is particularly sort of a disturbing subject for me, because in India, what we
[Amit Varma]: right now have is education system has always been buggered.
[Amit Varma]: But now what we have is our demographic dividend, what people call it is really a demographic
[Amit Varma]: disaster, where you have more than a million people a month coming into the workforce without
[Amit Varma]: jobs.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the key sort of problems there is that not only are there no jobs for them,
[Amit Varma]: they don't even have any skills.
[Amit Varma]: Our education system doesn't even give them the skills to go out there and do something.
[Amit Varma]: And there's this massive mismatch between demand and supply, that the education supply
[Amit Varma]: is not providing the kind of skills that the markets actually need.
[Amit Varma]: And this is, to me a classic fault of it being top down and markets not allowed to operate.
[Guest]: And, you know, I trace this back with the help of the wonderful Indian thinker about
[Guest]: this, Sugata Mitra, to the idea that the British Empire decided it needed clerks who would
[Guest]: be the same in Canada and India, so that the people in the center could understand, could
[Guest]: treat them the same.
[Guest]: And so they needed to be cogs in a machine.
[Guest]: And so they needed to give them this very systematic, similar education, a lot of which
[Guest]: is still found around the world and we, you know, here we are in the 21st century with
[Guest]: all sorts of technologies and we've not really changed the way we educate, enabling children
[Guest]: to learn.
[Guest]: And that often means using new technology is very important.
[Guest]: And I also, I think, touch on James Tooley's work in Hyderabad and other places where he
[Guest]: finds that actually the people are voting with their feet and seeking out low-cost private
[Guest]: education of an extremely cheap kind, but rather than going for the state provision.
[Guest]: And this shows how there is demand out there for change.
[Guest]: It's interesting to hear that in India you're just as frustrated by the mismatch between
[Guest]: what schools are doing and what the workforce is demanding, the employment world is demanding.
[Guest]: We feel the same in Britain anyway.
[Amit Varma]: No, and one quote that really spoke to me was you quoted a gentleman named Albert Shankar
[Amit Varma]: and he said, start quote, it's no surprise that our school system doesn't improve.
[Amit Varma]: It resembles a communist economy more than our own market economy.
[Guest]: It's correct, isn't it?
[Guest]: I mean, you know, it really is a centrally planned system, most education systems in
[Unknown]: most countries.
[Guest]: And he was a union official, actually, American union official.
[Amit Varma]: Your 11th chapter is about the evolution of population, about the harm that Malthusian
[Amit Varma]: thinking does.
[Amit Varma]: What I'll do is, because we're kind of running out of time and you need to check out of your
[Amit Varma]: room where we are recording this, I'll skip over the rest of your chapters, I'll mention
[Amit Varma]: them and just end with a couple of broad questions.
[Amit Varma]: Your 11th chapter is the evolution of population, your 12th chapter is the evolution of leadership,
[Amit Varma]: where you question Thomas Carlyle's great man theory, and, you know, which is again
[Amit Varma]: extremely fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And actually, I do want to stop for a moment on chapter 13.
[Amit Varma]: That's the evolution of government.
[Amit Varma]: And you begin the chapter by writing about how gangs arise in prisons and what that sort
[Guest]: of indicates.
[Guest]: Can you tell us?
[Guest]: Yeah, no, this is fascinating work that shows that within prisons, people tend to self organize
[Guest]: into gangs.
[Guest]: And the gangs then impose order on the prisons and tend to suppress violence, actually, because
[Amit Varma]: in male prisons where the population goes over a certain size, and therefore some kind
[Amit Varma]: of government is needed.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And in fact, it's starting to happen in female prisons now, which are on the whole once a
[Guest]: population reaches exactly, yeah.
[Guest]: And I think this is an analogy for what happened in societies as to when government spontaneously
[Guest]: arose.
[Guest]: Because after all, what is government, it is a monopoly on violence, essentially, that's
[Guest]: the sort of core point of government is to say, we will have all the weapons or most
[Guest]: of the weapons ourselves, and we will have the right to violently or forcibly suppress
[Guest]: certain behavior.
[Guest]: No one else has that right.
[Guest]: And once you've got that, you can live your life free from the threat of being arbitrarily
[Guest]: assassinated by one of your rivals.
[Guest]: But of course, you've now got the threat of being arbitrarily assassinated by your government,
[Guest]: if it takes against you, as indeed, people have experienced in communist and fascist
[Amit Varma]: regimes.
[Amit Varma]: And the government can do a variety of things, which if someone else did would be criminal,
[Amit Varma]: but the government because of the government, they can do it, they can abduct you, they
[Guest]: can steal from you, they can just do whatever they want.
[Guest]: It's extraordinary, isn't it?
[Guest]: They can tax you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I did say steal free.
[Unknown]: You did say steal free.
[Guest]: And they never say thank you either when they do that.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a great paragraph of yours, which of course, I'm going to quote, which is government
[Amit Varma]: began as a mafia protection racket, claiming a monopoly on violence and extracting a rent
[Amit Varma]: tax in return for protecting his citizens from depredation by outsiders.
[Amit Varma]: This is the origin of almost all government.
[Amit Varma]: And today's mafia protection rackets are all in the process of evolving into government
[Amit Varma]: stop code.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of very interesting how in a democracy like ours, for example, what an
[Amit Varma]: election amounts to is you have different criminal gangs vying to be the one legal mafia
[Guest]: for a period of five years or whatever, correct.
[Guest]: It's a very good way of looking at it.
[Guest]: You know, there's a guy who stands up there says, I want to spend other people's money
[Guest]: for five years.
[Guest]: I want to be in charge of spending other people's money on a massive scale for five years.
[Guest]: And we are expected to find him a moral leader.
[Guest]: You know, why are we surprised when we end up with people like Donald Trump in charge
[Guest]: of the world?
[Guest]: If that's if that's the recipe way, which we're choosing people, essentially, you will
[Amit Varma]: have the most sociopathic power hungry people coming to power anyway, of course, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you end the chapter with by talking about, quote, the equally mistaken belief that fascism
[Amit Varma]: and communism are opposites.
[Amit Varma]: In reality, they are closely related historical competitors for the same constituents.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Guest]: And they're both top down.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And I think there's much a lot of people realize that there's much more similarity between
[Guest]: the different types of totalitarian regime.
[Guest]: And actually, if you look at the origins of fascism, you know, Mussolini was a communist
[Guest]: before he was a fascist.
[Guest]: Hitler was a socialist before he was a Nazi and so on.
[Guest]: And you know, they end up being very, very similar.
[Guest]: The one difference is that the fascist regimes tend to allow private business to depredate
[Guest]: on their behalf, whereas communist regimes tend to encourage state owned businesses to
[Guest]: depredate on their behalf.
[Amit Varma]: But that's about the difference of the structure of coercion.
[Amit Varma]: But the bottom line there in both cases is coercion and top down mass coercion.
[Guest]: And of course, communism is slightly better at pretending that it's acting on behalf of
[Guest]: ordinary people.
[Guest]: But it isn't really.
[Guest]: I mean, it ends up being an incredibly unequal society in terms of access to resources.
[Amit Varma]: Your last three chapters are about the evolution of religion, the evolution of money, the evolution
[Amit Varma]: of the Internet, all really fascinating, but I don't want to hold you up now.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll end with these broad questions.
[Amit Varma]: One of which is that, why is it that people crave top down explanations for everything?
[Amit Varma]: Is it the way we've evolved?
[Amit Varma]: Is it possibly selected for?
[Guest]: It's a difficult question this and I don't really know the answer.
[Guest]: And it talks about the intentional stance, which is the tendency to see agency behind
[Guest]: everything.
[Guest]: So if there's a thunderstorm, we assume that it's a God.
[Guest]: If there's an earthquake, we assume we're being punished for our sins or something like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: And perhaps there is an evolutionary psychology explanation for this.
[Guest]: Because if you walk around thinking the world is full of accidental happenings that don't
[Guest]: have any agency behind them, you will occasionally miss out on insights into how your fellow
[Guest]: human beings are behaving.
[Guest]: So if a rock hits you on the back of the head as you're walking down a path, you will think,
[Guest]: oh, well, I was unlucky.
[Guest]: A rock flew off the ground and hit me in the back of the head.
[Guest]: Whereas if you turn around and say, right, who threw that?
[Guest]: You've got a point, actually, that you're probably better off having a hair trigger
[Guest]: for assuming intentional actions.
[Guest]: It probably won't get you into too much trouble, and it will enable you to be.
[Guest]: But it leads to what is essentially living in a state of constant conspiracy theory.
[Guest]: That's what we are as human beings.
[Guest]: We're constantly in a conspiracy theory that God created the world, that God is running
[Guest]: the world, or that government is in charge.
[Guest]: These are conspiracy theories.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess the world is so complex and mind-boggling that it's natural to imagine that this is
[Amit Varma]: selected for that we look for simple narratives to explain the world.
[Amit Varma]: And whatever narrative fits as many of the facts as there are, that narrative will make
[Amit Varma]: the most sense to us.
[Amit Varma]: And a top-down narrative can fit everything.
[Amit Varma]: So you make sense of the world originally by invoking a God early on, it's their nature
[Amit Varma]: gods and then the gods themselves evolve as religion evolves.
[Guest]: Which of course is why this book has not been terribly successful, is because this isn't
[Guest]: something everyone really wants to hear.
[Guest]: I'm fighting against human nature here.
[Guest]: I'm trying to get people to reject their instincts.
[Amit Varma]: Instead of the evolution of everything, you should have called your book the design of
[Amit Varma]: everything.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And then I might have sold more copies.
[Amit Varma]: Let me ask my last question.
[Amit Varma]: Given the sort of resistance to our ideas of spontaneous order and natural selection
[Amit Varma]: and all these beautiful processes which explain the world, what is it that gives you sort
[Amit Varma]: of hope and despair, it's a two part question, about the future of human society, about the
[Amit Varma]: evolution of human society, so to say?
[Guest]: Well, the track record of the last 200 years is the rational, behind my rational optimism,
[Guest]: that we have sufficiently managed to embrace enlightened ideas to unleash a torrent of
[Guest]: innovation that has improved the lives of millions of people.
[Guest]: And it's continuing.
[Guest]: And it's quite hard to put that genie back in the bottle, that despite ourselves, despite
[Guest]: our intentional stance, despite our top-down view of the world, nonetheless, in our interactions
[Guest]: we do enough bottom-up things to cause this increasing amelioration of the state of human
[Guest]: beings.
[Guest]: And actually, in order to do bad things with technology, in order to release computer viruses
[Guest]: or anything, you have to on the whole be secretive, cut yourself off from the ferment of experimentation
[Guest]: and bottom-up stuff that is driving the good stuff in the world.
[Guest]: So on the whole, I think the good will win out for that reason, because it can happen
[Guest]: in the sunshine, whereas bad stuff has to happen in the dark.
[Guest]: And that gives me some hope for the future.
[Guest]: But, you know, somebody sitting in the Roman Empire or just before the First World War
[Guest]: or something might have said something similar.
[Guest]: So I might be the man who's fallen out of the skyscraper and says, so far, so good as
[Amit Varma]: he passes the second story.
[Amit Varma]: Matt, thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: It's a great honor.
[Guest]: Well, thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: You've been incredibly perceptive in your understanding of what I was trying to say
[Guest]: and said some of the things much better than I say them.
[Amit Varma]: I just quoted you.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks a lot.
[Unknown]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do hop on over to Amazon and pick up Matt
[Amit Varma]: Ridley's excellent book, The Evolution of Everything.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A, and you can browse past
[Amit Varma]: episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Every week comes a show where three people come together to tell you about stuff they
[Unknown]: like.
[Unknown]: A movie, a TV show, a book, and other stuff.
[Unknown]: Tune in every Monday on the IVM podcast app to IVM Likes.
[Unknown]: Batman approves this message.
[Unknown]: Thank you, Batman.
[Unknown]: Do you have a night routine?
[Unknown]: Well, everyone has one, and the to-do list usually looks like this.
[Unknown]: Brush your teeth, set that alarm, get into your pajamas, and switch off those screens.
[Unknown]: But here's one more to add to that list.
[Unknown]: Tune into the Positively Unlimited podcast for a dose of positive action and tips on
[Unknown]: how to build powerful mindsets.
[Unknown]: Tune in every Monday on the IVM podcast app, ivmpodcast.com, or wherever you tune into
[Unknown]: podcasts.